Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry
HOLGER GRUEN, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Germany
CARSTEN BENTHIN, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Germany
MICHAEL KERN, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Germany
DAVID MCALLISTER, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., USA




Fig. 1. Our tetrahedral cage-based method allows for ray tracing 585 million animated triangles (uniquely
animated objects, no reuse through instancing) at 60 frames per second on an AMD RX 9070 XT at 1080p.

We present a method for efficiently ray tracing large amounts of uniquely animated complex mesh-based
geometry. A tetrahedral cage is used to split the original non-animated triangle geometry into disjoint sets of
triangles. For each tetrahedron, an acceleration structure is built over its enclosed triangles, and a separate
one over all tetrahedra. Instead of applying animation transformations to the actual triangular geometry, we
apply them only to the tetrahedral cage and transform rays intersecting the animated tetrahedra. Only the
acceleration structure over all tetrahedra needs to be rebuilt once per frame. The cost of animating geometry
per frame depends solely on the resolution of the tetrahedral cage and is decoupled from the density of the
original geometry. Our method targets animations that preserve triangle connectivity and approximates vertex
motion by a piecewise-linear deformation induced by the tetrahedral cage. We demonstrate that our method
outperforms competing animation approaches in both update time and memory consumption, enabling ray
tracing of large amounts of animated complex geometry in real time on current generation GPUs.

CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Ray tracing; • Theory of computation → Sorting and
searching; Massively parallel algorithms.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: animation, bounding volume hierarchy, ray tracing

ACM Reference Format:
Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister. 2026. Ray Tracing Massive Amounts
of Animated Geometry. Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech. 9, 4, Article 49 (July 2026), 18 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3820014

Authors’ Contact Information: Holger Gruen, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Germany, holger.gruen@amd.com; Carsten
Benthin, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Germany, carsten.benthin@amd.com; Michael Kern, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.,
Germany, michael.kern@amd.com; David McAllister, Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., USA, david.mcallister@amd.com.


© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive
Version of Record was published in Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3820014.



                        Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:2                                                Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister


1      Introduction
Real-time ray tracing of animated geometry, in particular animated triangle meshes, requires not
only animating the actual triangles per frame but also updating or rebuilding the acceleration
structure over the triangles. This process has high computational and memory costs. The costs
scale directly with the amount of animated triangles and are therefore limited per frame to avoid
exceeding the given frame time and memory budget. Given the constraint of maintaining real-time
frame rates of 60 frames per second or more, only a few milliseconds can be afforded to animate
geometry and to update acceleration structures each frame. Techniques like using lower resolution
geometry level of detail (LOD), partial (staggered) acceleration structure updates, or selective reuse
of animated geometry instead of applying unique animations are common mitigation strategies to
lower the per-frame costs.
   We propose a method to address the issue of a limited budget of animated geometry per frame
by decoupling the cost of animating geometry from the triangle density. We focus on deformable
animation, where the triangle connectivity remains unchanged, while the vertex animation is
approximated by a piecewise-linear deformation induced by a tetrahedral cage. Our method builds
a low-resolution tetrahedral cage over the original non-animated geometry in a preprocessing step,
splitting it into small disjoint sets of triangles. An acceleration structure is built over all triangles
within a tetrahedron and a top-level acceleration structure is built over all tetrahedra. This creates
a two-level acceleration structure hierarchy. Instead of applying animation transformations to
the triangles per frame, we apply them only to the tetrahedral cage and update only the top-level
acceleration structure per frame. The set of triangles within a tetrahedron and its acceleration
structure are never modified. A ray is traced through the top-level acceleration structure first, and
for every intersected tetrahedron, a uniquely deformed copy of the ray, based on the transformed
tetrahedron, is created and used to intersect the static bottom-level acceleration structure within.
   The resolution of the tetrahedral cage is independent of the triangle density of the animated
object, and the number of tetrahedral cage triangles is significantly smaller than the total amount
of triangles in the object. This reduces the per-frame animation cost to only a fraction of the
cost of traditional approaches, which modify all object triangles and update the corresponding
acceleration structure. At the same time, our approach requires significantly less memory. Savings
are particularly high when copies of the same triangular object are animated multiple times but
with different animations. Given the memory and time savings, our approach is able to ray trace
massive amounts of uniquely animated geometries in real time which has not been possible before.
   Our contributions include:
       • Applying tetrahedral cages to decouple animation complexity, BVH memory footprint, and
         update time from triangle density when ray tracing animated geometry.
       • Two new algorithms for ray tracing animated geometry using tetrahedral cages: the first
         exploits ray-instance transformations for efficiency, the second guarantees watertightness
         using relative 4D geometry and bounding volume encodings.
       • A mapping of our algorithms to the DXR pipeline, allowing easy adoption on current genera-
         tion GPUs.

2      Related Work
Ray tracing animated content requires updating the underlying acceleration structure. In recent
years, the bounding volume hierarchy (BVH) has been established as the dominant acceleration
structure for ray tracing, and researchers have proposed many different BVH build algorithms [Meis-
ter et al. 2021]. For animations with limited motion, a BVH update, which refits the BVH from the
leaves to the root, has been the preferred choice due to its low cost. In order to support arbitrary

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                  49:3


geometry transformations, e.g., an object exploding into pieces, a more costly BVH rebuild is
required to maintain acceleration structure quality. Alternative approaches try to reduce BVH
update/rebuild cost by employing lazy build strategies [Hunt et al. 2007; Lee and Liktor 2020] or by
incrementally modifying the existing BVH’s topology [Karras and Aila 2013; Kensler 2008].
   Real-time ray tracing APIs like DXR [Microsoft 2020] or Vulkan-RT [Khronos Group 2020] use a
two-level acceleration structure hierarchy: a bottom-level acceleration structure (BLAS) per object
and a top-level acceleration structure (TLAS) over instances of objects. A BLAS rebuild is required
when triangles within an object change, and a TLAS rebuild is required when instances of objects
change, or when the object itself changes. Most DXR or Vulkan implementations use BVHs as
acceleration structures. Depending on API quality flags, the implementation can decide whether to
perform a full BVH rebuild or a simpler BVH update.
   Displaced micro-meshes (DMMs) ([Maggiordomo et al. 2023]) avoid the construction of the
BVH over the geometry by providing an implicitly defined BVH over the hierarchically encoded
micro-mesh. Gruen et. al. [2024] proposed a method to improve the quality of DMMs in the context
of animation. DMMs have not been widely adopted, as their representation is tied to piecewise
manifold objects, which limits their applicability when dealing with real-world content.
   Building triangle meshes out of small triangle clusters instead of individual triangles has become
increasingly common in recent years due to cluster-based geometry LOD rendering [Brian Karis
2022]. Ray tracing of cluster-based LODs has been shown [Benthin and Peters 2023] and real-time
API support has been proposed [Microsoft 2026; NVIDIA Corporation 2024]. Clusters introduce
another level into the existing two-level hierarchies and therefore offer a finer granularity when
only parts of objects are affected by animation.
   For scenes with a high instance/object count, rebuilding the top-level BVH per frame can be a
limiting factor. Top-level partitions [Khronos Group 2024] help reduce BVH build complexity by
classifying sets of objects as affected by changes in the scene or not. This prevents rebuilding or
updating the entire BVH when only a subset of instances/objects have been modified.
   Tetrahedral cages, as a spatial acceleration structure for 3D objects, have been widely used in the
context of animation, deformation, simulation [Alliez et al. 2005; Jacobson et al. 2011; Joshi et al.
2007; Mezger et al. 2003; Morrical et al. 2023; Müller et al. 2005] and in ray-tracing and acceleration-
structure contexts, including approaches that employ non-orthogonal local parameterizations for
traversal [Aman et al. 2022; Kácerik and Bittner 2025; Lagae and Dutré 2008]. Tetrahedra offer a
balance between geometric simplicity and the directional tightness of an oriented bounding box.
Very recently, Luton et. al. [Luton and Tricard 2025] presented a method to rasterize animated but
meshless object representations using tetrahedral cages. Our method follows their general idea of
applying the deformation transformation to the non-animated pose of the geometry but extends it
to the real-time ray tracing domain.
   The cost of updating or rebuilding BVH structures is directly related to the actual amount of
animated geometry. When animating a large number of complex objects with unique deformations,
this can quickly become the limiting factor in achieving real-time performance. Even worse, each
uniquely animated object also needs a copy of the original geometry and its acceleration structure,
which can lead to excessive memory consumption.




                     Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:4                                                Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister




       Fig. 3. A triangle overlapping two tetrahedra is clipped, and the resulting polygons are triangulated.




Fig. 2. 2D illustration of our tetrahedralization algorithm (left to right): the object in the non-animated pose,
voxelization using a regular grid, removal of empty voxels and splitting of non-empty voxels into tetrahedra;
tetrahedra that do not intersect any geometry are removed. (right-most) Each voxel is split into six tetrahedra.


3      Building Tetrahedra Cages
Our approach uses a tetrahedral cage to split a triangular object into smaller disjoint sets of triangles.
Various algorithms exist [Si 2006; Wang et al. 2020; Wang and Yu 2012; Yu et al. 2024] to build such
a tetrahedral cage. We adopt a simple voxel-based approach that runs in multiple stages (see Figure
2). We start with the object in its non-animated pose and use a regular grid to subdivide it into
voxels. All empty voxels are removed and the remaining voxels are split into tetrahedra. In the final
step, all tetrahedra that do not intersect any object geometry are removed. In our implementation,
each voxel is split into six tetrahedra [Domiter and Žalik 2008; Freudenthal 1942].
   Given the set of non-empty tetrahedra, we determine the set of triangles intersecting each
tetrahedron and clip these against the tetrahedron’s four bounding triangles (see Figure 3). This
clipping process creates a small triangle mesh, a 𝜇Mesh, per tetrahedron. Clipping a triangle that
overlaps adjacent tetrahedra is required to avoid artifacts, as each tetrahedron will deform the same
triangle differently. Our implementation makes sure that vertices introduced through clipping are
deduplicated and are shared between the current and all adjacent tetrahedra. The clipping process is
necessary to ensure the following bounding property: all vertices of the 𝜇Mesh are contained within
the volume of the corresponding tetrahedron. Vertices shared with neighboring tetrahedra are
located exactly on the bounding triangles of the tetrahedron. Please note that clipping introduces
new triangles and vertices, therefore increasing their total counts (see Section 7).
   Once all 𝜇Meshes are created, a 𝜇BLAS is created per 𝜇Mesh. A 𝜇BLAS is a bottom-level acceler-
ation structure built over the triangles in a 𝜇Mesh. Each 𝜇BLAS is created once and will remain
static (never modified in any way). Note that additional optimizations for static 𝜇BLAS such as
compaction could be applied at this point. The same tetrahedral cage and therefore all associated
𝜇Meshes and 𝜇BLAS objects can be reused by uniquely animated instances of the same object (see
Section 7). In a final step, a top-level acceleration structure is built over all tetrahedra. We will call
this a tetLAS, and call the mesh consisting of the bounding triangles of all tetrahedra a tetMesh.
Note that a tetLAS has tetrahedra at the leaf level and each tetrahedron refers to a 𝜇BLAS object
(see Figure 4).
   Our current implementation does not enforce a fixed triangle budget per tetrahedron. The number
of triangles per 𝜇BLAS is determined by the cage resolution and geometry distribution.

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                   49:5




Fig. 4. (left) Regular BVH-based acceleration structure where internal nodes either refer to other internal
nodes or leaves containing triangles. (right) In a tetLAS, instead of referencing triangles, internal nodes can
refer to tetrahedra and those to 𝜇 BLASes.


4     Animating and Intersecting Tetrahedra Cages
A tetrahedral cage (tetMesh) that encapsulates a set of triangles offers an efficient way to ap-
proximate any kind of deformable animation (with triangle connectivity unchanged) applied to
the vertices of the triangles themselves. Instead of modifying the triangle vertices, our method
only modifies the vertices of the tetMesh, which results in a piecewise-linear spatial deformation.
For our test scenes (see Section 7), we either animate the tetMesh vertices by directly applying a
transformation function to each vertex or by using a bone-based animation scheme. After modifying
the tetMesh vertices, the tetLAS is updated. As the number of tetrahedra is orders of magnitude
smaller than the total number of triangles (see Section 7), the cost of updating the tetLAS is signifi-
cantly smaller than updating a regular BLAS over all triangles. Modifying the tetMesh vertices and
updating the tetLAS has to be done once per frame before rendering.
   During rendering, a ray in world-space is traced through the tetLAS first. Once a tetrahedron is
hit, the ray is transformed from world-space into the tetrahedron’s local space (and the associated
𝜇BLAS). Following that, the transformed ray is traversed through the 𝜇BLAS. Our method transforms
the ray from world-space into the tetrahedron’s local space by expressing the transformation as
a 3D basis-change operation (see Figure 5 and Section 4.1). Even though this operation is very
efficient, it cannot guarantee watertightness in all cases. We therefore propose another variant (see
Section 5) that keeps the ray in world-space and instead transforms geometry and acceleration
structure data from a 4D representation into world-space during ray traversal.
   In general, the orders of magnitude lower complexity of tetMesh and tetLAS in comparison to
the original triangular object allows us to significantly reduce memory consumption, animation
complexity, and acceleration structure build times (see Section 7). In particular, the 𝜇BLAS objects
can be reused for different deformations of the same object. Each unique deformation only requires
a copy of the tetMesh, which we call tetAnimCopy.

4.1    Intersecting Tetrahedra using Ray-Instance Transformations
Modern ray tracing APIs use a two-level TLAS/BLAS hierarchy in which the TLAS is built over
instanced BLAS objects. Instances can be transformed by a 3 × 4 matrix that transforms a ray from
world-space into the local space of the BLAS object. Note that real-time ray tracing APIs [Khronos
Group 2020; Microsoft 2020] require specifying the inverse matrix. In the following, we will describe
how to exploit the instance transformation to transform a ray from world-space into the local
tetrahedron space (see Figure 5).
   The four vertices, 𝑣 0, 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 and 𝑣 3 (see right-hand side of Figure 5), of each non-deformed tetrahe-
dron, define three 3D basis vectors of a non-orthogonal coordinate system. If we subtract 𝑣 0 from
every vertex of a 𝜇Mesh, then all resulting vertices can be written as a linear combination of 𝑣 1 − 𝑣 0 ,

                      Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:6                                                Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister




Fig. 5. (a) An animated tetrahedron that is hit by a ray in world-space. We determine the entry and exit
triangles of the hit animated tetrahedron and the two barycentric coordinate sets of the entry and exit points.
(b) These barycentric coordinates are used to compute entry and exit points on the same triangles of the
non-animated tetrahedron. These two new points define our new transformed ray. (c) The four vertices of a
(non-degenerate) animated tetrahedron form a basis of a non-orthogonal coordinate system (see Equations 1
and 2). We can express steps (a) and (b) of transforming the ray from world to local space as a basis-change
operation (d).


𝑣 2 − 𝑣 0 , and 𝑣 3 − 𝑣 0 . Those can be used to form a 3 × 3 matrix, as shown in Equation 1. We assume
that these vectors are linearly independent for now.

                                     𝑣 1 − 𝑣 0𝑥 𝑣 2𝑥 − 𝑣 0𝑥 𝑣 3𝑥 − 𝑣 0𝑥
                                    © 𝑥
                               𝑀 = ­𝑣 1𝑦 − 𝑣 0𝑦 𝑣 2𝑦 − 𝑣 0𝑦 𝑣 3𝑦 − 𝑣 0𝑦 ®                        (1)
                                                                          ª

                                    « 𝑣 1𝑧 − 𝑣 0𝑧 𝑣 2𝑧 − 𝑣 0𝑧 𝑣 3𝑧 − 𝑣 0𝑧 ¬
  In a similar vein, we can define a 3 × 4 matrix 𝐴 from the four world-space vertices (𝑎 0, 𝑎 1, 𝑎 2
and 𝑎 3 ) of the animated version of the same tetrahedron, as shown in Equation 2. The first three
columns of 𝐴 define the basis of the deformed coordinate system. The fourth column moves the
origin of the animated coordinate system to 𝑎 0 .

                                   𝑎 1 − 𝑎 0𝑥 𝑎 2𝑥 − 𝑎 0𝑥 𝑎 3𝑥 − 𝑎 0𝑥 𝑎 0𝑥
                                 © 𝑥
                             𝐴 = ­𝑎 1𝑦 − 𝑎 0𝑦 𝑎 2𝑦 − 𝑎 0𝑦 𝑎 3𝑦 − 𝑎 0𝑦 𝑎 0𝑦 ®                       (2)
                                                                             ª
                                   𝑎
                                 « 1𝑧   −  𝑎 0𝑧 𝑎 2𝑧 − 𝑎 0𝑧 𝑎 3𝑧 − 𝑎 0𝑧 𝑎 0𝑧 ¬

   Transforming the non-animated vertices in the static 𝜇BLAS with respect to the four vertices
of the animated tetrahedron becomes a simple basis-change operation. Therefore, we choose
𝐴(𝑀 −1 )3𝑥4 as the instance transform for the 𝜇BLAS. Here, (𝑀 −1 )3𝑥4 is constructed by inverting
𝑀 and extending 𝑀 −1 to a 3 × 4 matrix by adding a fourth column of zeros. A requirement of
the instance transformation-based approach is that all non-animated tetrahedra need to be non-
degenerate. As the tetrahedra are generated in a preprocessing step, we assume that the generation
of degenerate tetrahedra can be prevented. Another restriction is that all 𝜇BLAS instance transforms
must be invertible, i.e., (𝐴(𝑀 −1 )3𝑥4 ) −1 or 𝑀𝐴 −1 must exist.
   The instance transformation-based approach cannot guarantee watertightness as an animated
object will consist of instances with varying transforms. Each instance will use a different ray when
intersecting the local 𝜇BLAS. We mitigated this problem by slightly enlarging all tetrahedra before

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                   49:7




Fig. 6. For the instance transformation-based approach, possible watertightness issues are reduced by slightly
growing a tetrahedron along its unit face normals before clipping triangles against.




we clip the original triangles. Each tetrahedron is enlarged by moving each of the four planes
that define a tetrahedron outward along its outward-pointing unit-normal by a small epsilon, as
shown in Figure 6. This creates overlapping surface geometry where the clipped triangles share
an edge. The epsilon is user-defined and scene-dependent, as it must be just large enough so that
the overlapping geometry does not create any visible rendering artifacts or too many duplicated
tetrahedra intersections (see Section 8), while at the same time avoiding most of the watertightness
issues. For our test scenes (see Section 7), we use an epsilon of 2.5 × 10−6 . A solution that guarantees
watertightness is presented in Section 5. We tested our mitigation approach in isolation for a sphere
model (radius 100, ∼1M original triangles, ∼1.2M triangles after clipping, 9 × 12 × 9 voxel cage),
tracing rays from the sphere origin outwards. Without our mitigation ∼ 0.01% of all rays pass
through the closed sphere, while with our mitigation, no watertightness escapes occur.


5   Alternative Approach Guaranteeing Watertightness
Watertightness issues for our tetrahedral cage-based traversal, where for example, a ray shoots
through a shared edge between adjacent triangles, are caused by different tetrahedra applying
different world-to-local-space transformations to the world-space ray, creating different rays in
local space, which are then traversed through the local 𝜇BLAS. These different local rays can provide
inconsistent ray-triangle intersection results for vertices, edges, and triangles shared by different
tetrahedra. The clipping process (see Section 3) will make sure that no single triangle overlaps
multiple tetrahedra, and that inconsistency can only occur at the shared bounding triangles of
two adjacent tetrahedra, e.g., for a shared triangle edge inside a tetrahedron’s bounding triangle.
However, numerical inaccuracies can be introduced by the clipping process itself, which could
be another source of watertightness problems. These could occur when a triangle of the original
mesh that passes through the shared bounding triangle of two adjacent tetrahedra is clipped,
creating a triangle edge that lies exactly on the shared bounding triangle. The limited accuracy of
floating-point representation does not always allow us to accurately represent vertex positions
that are exactly on a shared bounding triangle between two adjacent tetrahedra (see Figure 7). The
new vertices created in the clipping process might be slightly below or above the shared bounding
triangle. This breaks the tetrahedron bounding property because parts of the clipped triangle are
located outside the tetrahedron.


                      Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:8                                                Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister




Fig. 7. 2D illustration: (left) The blue triangle is clipped with respect to the shared bounding triangle of two
adjacent tetrahedra, creating two new vertices. These new vertices will not always be exactly on the shared
bounding triangle but may be slightly off. (right) Zoom: the upper clipped vertex representation lies within
the left tetrahedron by a small floating-point margin, while the lower clipped vertex lies within the right
tetrahedron. This breaks the bounding property of the tetrahedron, as parts of the clipped triangle are outside.
A ray that only intersects the left tetrahedron close to the shared bounding triangle could miss the clipped
triangle at the far right.


   To guarantee watertightness, we need to perform multiple steps: (a) restore the bounding property
of tetrahedra with respect to the contained triangles, (b) provide a consistent view of clipped vertices,
edges, and triangles located at the shared bounding triangle between adjacent tetrahedra, and (c)
perform consistent ray-triangle intersection tests using the world-space ray and triangle vertices.
We will present a method that achieves these three requirements next.

5.1    4D Barycentric Coordinates
3D barycentric coordinates within a triangle extend to 4D barycentric coordinates for a tetrahedron.
Any 3D point 𝑝 within the tetrahedron can be represented as barycentric linear combinations of
the four vertices (𝑣 0, 𝑣 1, 𝑣 2 and 𝑣 3 ) defining the tetrahedron, as shown in Equation 3.


                                      𝑝 = 𝑏0 · 𝑣0 + 𝑏1 · 𝑣1 + 𝑏2 · 𝑣2 + 𝑏3 · 𝑣3                                   (3)
   This allows us to express all 3D points inside the tetrahedron (and on the bounding planes) using
four barycentric coordinates 𝑏 0, 𝑏 1 , 𝑏 2 and 𝑏 3 . The key idea to achieve watertightness is to express
all triangle vertices as 4D barycentric coordinates relative to the four tetrahedron vertices.
   We need to make sure that all points shared by two adjacent tetrahedra, i.e., all points inside a
shared bounding triangle, can be reconstructed bitwise identical, regardless of which of the two
tetrahedra is used. This requires a unique global ordering of the tetrahedra vertices. After clipping
the original mesh triangles to each tetrahedron, we deduplicate vertices from all resulting 𝜇Meshes
and assign a unique ID to each vertex. For each tetrahedron, we sort the four vertices based on
their unique IDs in ascending order and use this order each time we evaluate Equation 3.
   When computing the 4D barycentric coordinates for each vertex of a clipped 𝜇Mesh, we have to
deal with the following cases for these vertices:
   (1) The 𝜇Mesh vertex matches one of the tetrahedron’s vertices: only the barycentric coordinate
        that corresponds to the vertex is set to 1. The other three coordinates are set to zero.
   (2) The 𝜇Mesh vertex lies exactly on one of the edges of the tetrahedron: only the barycentric
        coordinates that correspond to the edge vertices are set to non-zero values. The other two
        coordinates are set to zero. The sum of the two non-zero coordinates must be one.
   (3) The 𝜇Mesh vertex lies exactly inside one of the bounding triangles of the tetrahedron. The
        three barycentric coordinates that correspond to the bounding triangle vertices are set to
        non-zero values. The remaining coordinate is set to zero. Note that the sum of the three
        non-zero barycentric coordinates must be one.

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                   49:9


    (4) The 𝜇Mesh vertex lies fully inside one of the tetrahedra of the cage: all four barycentric
        coordinates are non-zero and must sum to one.
   We use a small, user-defined distance threshold to detect if a vertex is very close to a tetMesh
vertex, edge, or triangle. If the vertex is close enough, we snap it to the closest vertex, edge, or
triangle and use the snapped position to compute barycentric coordinates.
   Given barycentric coordinates and ordered evaluation of Equation 3, we can reconstruct the
bit-exact world-space positions of any point within shared bounding triangles, regardless of which
of the adjacent tetrahedra we use for the evaluation. We use the relative 4D barycentric encoding
for all position data of the non-animated 𝜇Mesh and the corresponding 𝜇BLAS, i.e., triangle vertices
and bounding volumes. As the triangle vertices are expressed as relative 4D barycentric coordinates,
the acceleration structure has to bound relative 4D positions as well. Therefore, we use a binary
bounding volume hierarchy with 4D axis-aligned bounding volumes. We call this a 4D BVH.
   When a ray intersects an animated tetrahedron (see Section 6), we traverse the associated 4D
BVH. At each traversal step, we on-the-fly reconstruct 3D world-space AABBs from the relative
4D representations (applying the min-sum heuristic [Nießner 2013] for tighter 3D bounds), given
the modified vertices of the tetrahedron. A similar step is performed for the triangle vertices at
the 4D BVH leaf level. The relative 4D BVH representation ensures tetrahedron-transformation
independence. Appendix A presents a proof that regardless of how the tetrahedron vertices change,
the conversion from a relative 4D BVH to a world-space 3D BVH preserves the bounding property.
The conversion from relative 4D to 3D world-space is required to guarantee watertightness for
ray-primitive intersection tests, as these need to be performed in the same space as the world-space
ray.

6    DXR Implementation
The standard approach to uniquely animate a triangular object is to first transform its triangle
vertices and then update the corresponding BLAS. Once this process is done for all animated
objects and BLASes in the scene, the TLAS over all object/BLAS instances has to be updated as
well. The resulting hierarchy structure for the standard animation approach, with a single instance
per animated object, is shown in Figure 8.




Fig. 8. (left) TLAS/BLAS hierarchy of the standard animation approach, here with a single instance per
uniquely animated object. The TLAS is built over all BLAS instances. Animation transformation is first applied
to all object vertices, then the BLAS is updated. Once all BLASes have been updated, the TLAS is updated.
(right) Different animations of the same object have their own tetAnimCopy (a copy of the tetrahedral cage)
but share the same 𝜇 BLAS object. Each tetAnimCopy is mapped to a single instance. Animation is first applied
to the tetMesh and then the corresponding TLAS over the instances (tetLAS) is updated.


  Current real-time ray tracing APIs, such as DXR [Microsoft 2020], do not have native support
for tetrahedral primitives. In the following, we will illustrate how to map the two variants of our
method (see Section 4.1 and Section 5.1) to the existing DXR API functionality.

                      Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:10                                               Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister


   In general, we start by placing a tetrahedral cage around each scene object in its original form
(non-animated). The clipping preprocessing phase creates a 𝜇Mesh per tetrahedron. These steps are
the same for both methods. Similarly, the 𝜇BLAS associated with a tetrahedron remains static and
independent of the transformation applied. Depending on the variant, the animation transformation
is either integrated into the instance transformation or directly applied to the tetrahedral cage.
If the same object is animated with different transformations applied, we only need to replicate
the tetrahedra cage, which reduces memory consumption (see Section 7). An example of this new
hierarchy that reuses the 𝜇BLAS is shown in Figure 8.
   Instance Transformation-Based Variant. For the instance-based variant, each 𝜇BLAS can be directly
mapped to a DXR BLAS built over triangles. The ray-triangle intersections are handled automatically
by the DXR intersection pipeline. Now, tetrahedra of all animated objects, each having its own
tetrahedral cage, are put together into a single combined list. Each tetrahedron in this list is mapped
to a single DXR instance. Each DXR instance transformation matrix is set to the tetrahedron’s
transformation as described in Section 4.1. In detail, we first precompute the transformation matrices
(𝑀𝑖−1 )3𝑥4 (see Equation 1) for all tetrahedra. These matrices are static during rendering. A compute
shader is dispatched to animate the vertices of all tetrahedra cages. Another compute shader reads
these vertices to compute matrices 𝐴𝑖 (see Equation 2). These matrices are combined into a single
matrix 𝑂𝑖 per tetrahedron. The 3 × 4 DXR instance transform matrix is set to the combined matrix
𝑂𝑖 𝐴𝑖 (𝑀𝑖−1 )3𝑥4 . Note that shading normals need to be transformed by the inverse transpose of the
instance transforms. This matrix is computed once per frame for each animated tetrahedron.
   Watertight Variant. For the watertight variant, we cannot use a DXR BLAS built over the triangles
of the 𝜇Mesh, as the triangle vertices and the bounding volumes are stored as 4D barycentric
coordinates relative to a given tetrahedron (see Section 5.1), and DXR does not offer direct support
for this. The reconstruction of the 3D world-space vertices and bounding volumes from relative
4D barycentric encodings has to be computed manually in software. We therefore leverage the
DXR procedural geometry support. Each time a ray enters a tetrahedron, a procedural shader that
traverses a precomputed binary 4D BVH is executed. The 4D position data is used to reconstruct
the 3D world-space positions of two nodes’ AABBs during ray traversal as well as the three triangle
vertices (see Section 5.1) for the ray-triangle intersection test. A TLAS is built over the AABBs of
the animated tetrahedra, with a one-to-one mapping between instance and tetrahedron.

7   Results
For our evaluation, we implemented a tetrahedra-based ray tracing framework, written in DirectX
12 and HLSL. All experiments were conducted on an AMD Radeon RX 9070 XT GPU with 16 GB of
memory, running Windows 11. Render timings include tracing two rays per pixel (one primary and
one secondary shadow ray) as well as shading and sampling. BLAS objects are updated using the
ACCELERATION_STRUCTURE_BUILD_FLAG_ALLOW_UPDATE and PREFER_FAST_BUILD flags,
while the TLAS is rebuilt with PREFER_FAST_TRACE.
  We tested our approach with three different scenes: Trees, Grass Patches, and Frogs (see Figure 9),
each varying in complexity and the count of animated objects. For each scene, we replicate the base
object multiple times and assign a unique tetrahedral animation cage to each replica. Each base
object was tested with medium and high tetrahedral cage resolutions. Both resolutions provide
sufficient accuracy, so that no visible differences compared to animating all triangles along the
chosen camera path were observed.
  Adapting Bone-Based Animation. The Frog model is the only test scene that supports bone-based
animation, which needs to be adapted to the tetrahedral cage. For each vertex of the tetrahedral

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                 49:11




Fig. 9. Test scenes: (left) Frogs: set of bone animated characters with 26.1m triangles, each Frog object has
249k vertices and 408k triangles, (right) Trees: a group of animated trees with 39.5m triangles, each Tree
object has 1.38m vertices and 1.58m triangles, (bottom) Grass Patches with 479m triangles, each Grass Patch
object has 60k vertices and 120k triangles.


cage, we find the closest vertex of the original triangle model and use its bone IDs and bone weights.
Note that this simple approach could be improved by a more advanced choice of bone IDs and
weights, or through adaptation to the structure of the underlying skeleton. Taking bone animation
into account, we extend our triangle clipping algorithm to deal with the per-vertex bone data. We
collect up to 12 unique bone IDs per triangle and extend each vertex to carry the associated bone
IDs and weights. If a vertex did not originally contain a particular bone ID, we set the weight for
this bone to zero. We can clip the weights of all bones in a triangle like other vertex attributes. After
the triangle clipping is done, we sort the vertex bone IDs of the vertices of the resulting triangles by
bone weight. We keep the four largest weights along with their associated bone IDs and normalize
the weights of these remaining four bones. Note that applying bone animation to the tetrahedral
cage only approximates the bone-based animation of the original triangle model. The quality of the
animation depends on the resolution of the tetrahedral cage. Note that during shading, we fetch
the three non-deformed vertex normals of the triangle hit and skin those to mimic the behavior of
the skinned original geometry.
   Clipping. Our method requires that the original triangles of an object are clipped against the
tetMesh, which introduces additional vertices and triangles (see Table 1). The increase depends on
the resolution of the tetrahedral cage and, for our test objects, is between 1.3 and 2.3× for triangles
and between 1.4 and 3.7× for vertices. A higher number of triangles and vertices similarly affects
the size of 𝜇BLASes. However, since 𝜇BLASes are reused for different animations of the same object,
the initially higher memory consumption is quickly amortized as the reuse count increases.
   Memory and Performance Comparisons. First, we compare memory consumption and rendering
times between our watertight and non-watertight tetrahedra-based methods (see Table 2). Although
memory consumption of the watertight method is only 2.3−3.2× that of the non-watertight method,

                      Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:12                                               Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister


Table 1. Statistics for a single animated test object. The number of triangles increases by 1.3 − 2.3× after
clipping. The average number of triangles per tetrahedron ranges from a few hundred to a few thousand,
depending on the scene and initial voxel resolution. The number of tetrahedra per object is two to three
orders of magnitude smaller than the number of triangles, which significantly reduces the animation cost.

         Voxel Res      #Tets #Vtx         #Tris #Vtx                  #Tris #Vtx                     #Tris/Tet
                                            Original                    Clipped                     Avg Min Max
                                                      Tree
         5×8×5         0.64k 0.204k       1.58m 1.38m 2.15m (1.36×) 1.96m (1.42×)                    3.3k 1 13k
         9 × 12 × 9    2.32k 0.639k       1.58m 1.38m 2.55m (1.61×) 2.35m (1.70×)                    1.1k 1 4.3k
                                                   Grass Patch
         6×5×6         0.66k 0.659k       120k 60.14k     207k (1.73×) 149k (2.48×)                   0.3k 1 2k
        10 × 9 × 10    2.42k 0.722k       120k 60.14k     277k (2.31×) 223k (3.70×)                  0.1k 1 0.9k
                                                      Frog
        15 × 15 × 15   1.91k 0.711k        408k 249k      618k (1.51×) 418k (1.68×)                  0.3k 1 1.7k
        25 × 25 × 25   5.55k 19.24k        408k 249k      761k (1.87×) 569k (2.29×)                  0.1k 1 0.8k

Table 2. Memory consumption and render time of our non-watertight and watertight methods for 25 Trees,
500 Grass Patches, and 81 Frogs. Our watertight method requires 2.3 − 3.2× more memory than non-watertight.
The non-hardware-accelerated software fallback introduces a 19 − 80× render time overhead.

                               25 Trees          500 Grass Patches         9×9 Frogs
                          Mem     Render Time   Mem      Render Time Mem Render Time
 Non-Watertight         209.7 MB     2.96 ms  145.6 MB      1.35 ms  190 MB       1 ms
   Watertight           540.5 MB     203 ms   459.4 MB      108 ms   442 MB       19 ms
   Overhead               2.5×        68.6×     3.2×          80×     2.3×         19×


the required software fallback introduces a significant runtime overhead of 19 − 80×, making it
unsuitable for real-time rendering and more applicable as a reference solution. This makes only the
non-watertight method applicable to real-time rendering on current generation GPU hardware,
while the watertight version can still be used as a validation reference.
   Next, we compare our non-watertight tetrahedra-based method against the standard approach,
which animates each individual triangle and then updates the triangle-based BLAS. Figure 10 shows
a detailed breakdown of memory consumption, as well as animation, acceleration structure build,
and render times for increasing numbers of Grass Patch objects. With an increasing number of
animated triangles, the standard approach exhibits steeper linear scaling compared to our approach.
By comparison, our approach is nearly flat, as the number of tetrahedra is two to three orders
of magnitude smaller, resulting in a 16.1× smaller memory consumption. The same applies to
animation and acceleration structure build times. The render time of our non-watertight version
is slightly higher than for the standard approach. For ray tracing-based applications, the total
time, which includes animation, acceleration structure updates, and rendering, is crucial. Here, our
non-watertight approach outperforms the standard approach by up to 9×, while providing similar
visual animation quality.
   Figure 11 shows similar results for the Trees and Frogs scenes. With an increasing number
of objects, the standard approach shows a steep increase in memory consumption, acceleration
structure update time, and render time. Even for a high number of objects per scene, our approach
shows only a marginal increase in memory consumption and update time, which results in a lower

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                 49:13




Fig. 10. Comparison of memory consumption, animation, acceleration structure build, and render times
between the standard approach (BLAS objects) and our non-watertight tetrahedra-based approach, for an
increasing number of Grass Patch objects (see Figure 9). Two tetrahedral cage resolutions are used: medium
(6×5×6) and high (10×9×10). The standard approach animates each individual triangle and then updates the
triangle-based BLAS. With an increasing number of patches, this results in steep linear increase in memory
consumption ((a) and (b)) as well as animation (c), and acceleration structure build times (d). By comparison,
our non-watertight tetrahedra-based approach only exhibits a marginal increase. The render time (e) of our
approach and the standard approach are very similar. For 500 grass patches, the total time (f), including
animation, acceleration structure, and render time, our non-watertight approach outperforms the standard
approach by up to 9×, depending on the resolution of the tetrahedral cage.




total time. Finally, we combined all three example scenes into a single scene (see Figure 1) which
cannot be ray traced with the standard approach due to the GPU memory limit of 16 GB. Our
approach is able to render this complex animated scene at ∼ 60 fps (two rays per pixel). Table 3
shows a detailed timing breakdown. With around 2.5m tetrahedra for this scene, the most expensive
phases per frame are animating the tetMesh vertices and rebuilding the TLAS over all tetrahedra.


                      Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:14                                               Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister




Fig. 11. Memory consumption (vertices and BLASes), update time (vertex animation and acceleration struc-
ture), render and total time for an increasing number of Tree objects and Frogs. Similar to the Grass Patch
scene (see Figure 10), the standard approach shows a steep increase in memory consumption, update and
total times, while our approach remains almost flat.


Table 3. Timing breakdown for the combined scene (see Figure 1). Only our tetrahedra-based approach is
able to render this scene at ∼ 60 fps (12.43 ms/frame) while only consuming 770.10 MB of GPU memory.
The update time, which includes animating the tetMesh vertices and rebuilding the TLAS (tetLAS) over the
tetrahedra, is the most expensive step and consumes 78% of the total time per frame.

         Anim Triangles Tets            Anim Time          Update Time Render Time                  Total Time
             584m       2.8m            0.35 ms (3%)       9.66 ms (78%) 2.42 ms (19%)               12.43 ms

Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                  49:15


8   Limitations
Our method approximates connectivity-preserving triangle mesh animation using a piecewise-
linear deformation induced by the tetrahedral cage. Because each tetrahedron induces an affine
deformation, geometry inside that tetrahedron is restricted to a locally linear motion. This approxi-
mation is well suited to the following scenarios:
     • Dense, uniquely-animated geometry with fixed triangle connectivity.
     • Smooth deformations such as bending of foliage, grass, or trees, as well as crowd motion.
     • Skeletal/bone animation, provided that the cage resolution is sufficiently high to approximate
       skinning.
The method is less suited for:
     • Substantial changes to mesh topology (e.g., explosions, destruction, cutting, etc.).
     • Per-triangle or high-frequency motion below the cage scale (e.g., cloth or facial animation
       with folds smaller than the cage resolution).
     • Complex character skinning with sharp weight changes near joints.
     • Rigid objects, for which conventional instancing is typically simpler and often preferable.
     • Keyframe-based animation, in which vertices are animated by interpolating their positions
       across keyframes.
Artifacts arising from insufficient cage resolution can often be reduced by locally refining the
tetrahedral cage (see Figure 12). Supporting keyframe-based animation requires recomputing the
transformation between corresponding triangle vertices in successive keyframes and applying
it to the tetrahedral cage. For animations that require per-triangle control or that alter triangle
connectivity, the affected 𝜇BLASes would need to be rebuilt. Bone-animated objects additionally
require assigning bones and weights to the tetrahedral cage.
   Finally, the method impacts ray tracing performance by trading increased ray traversal and
intersection costs for substantially reduced animation and acceleration-structure update costs.
The instance-based variant requires slight geometric overlap at shared tetrahedron boundaries to
mitigate watertightness artifacts, whereas the watertight variant relies on an expensive software
fallback. Because each original triangle is clipped against the tetMesh, the resulting sub-triangles
may be distributed across multiple tetrahedra. Consequently, when a ray intersects adjacent
tetrahedra, a shared edge may be tested multiple times, leading to repeated intersections of the
same original primitive. Assigning unique ownership of shared edges to tetrahedra can help mitigate
this issue.




Fig. 12. (Left) Original skinned triangle model. (Middle) Animation artifacts near joints caused by insufficient
tetrahedral cage resolution. (Right) A higher tetrahedral cage resolution around the targeted area reduces
the artifacts.




                       Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:16                                               Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister


9   Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we present a method for efficiently ray tracing massive amounts of uniquely animated
geometry. Our method decouples the complexity of animating triangular geometry from the
geometry’s triangle density. Our approach requires only a tetAnimCopy per uniquely animated
object, thereby dramatically reducing memory consumption, acceleration structure update times,
and the cost of object animation itself. Applications that are limited by acceleration structure build
times, animation times, or memory footprint when animating massive amounts of geometry can
directly benefit from our approach.
   Our approach supports varying levels of detail (LOD) by using tetrahedral cages at different
resolutions. Higher-resolution tetrahedral cages can improve the quality of animation results
at the expense of increased memory consumption and acceleration structure update times. In
general, our method can be directly combined with existing solutions for per-object LOD, staggered
acceleration structure updates, and the use of cluster-based geometry representations or TLAS
partitions [Microsoft 2026]. It is also possible to mix tetrahedral cage-based animation with standard
mesh-based or rigid-body animation. Direct hardware and API support for tetrahedra would improve
culling efficiency; similarly, support for multi-level instancing would allow for more flexibility in
trading ray tracing time versus acceleration structure build times.
   Future work will focus on improving the voxel-to-tetrahedra algorithm and the quality of bone-
based object animation, e.g., by running an optimization process over all keyframes to find the
set of bones and bone weights that minimize the difference between the skinned vertices of the
high-resolution object and the vertex positions produced by animated tetrahedral cages. Further
analysis of the curvature of the object’s surface around each vertex of each keyframe could be used
to improve the animation quality. If a tetrahedron contains vertices with a minimum curvature
above a threshold, the preprocessing stage could split the tetrahedron into sub-tetrahedra and
continue recursively.

Acknowledgments
Model courtesy: Frog (Sketchfab.com), Tree (cgtrader.com), Grass Patch (cgtrader.com). The authors
would like to thank Jakub Bokšanský, Joshua Barczak, Andrew Kensler, Nathan Morrical, Dave
Oldcorn and the anonymous reviewers for their feedback.

Copyright Notice and Trademarks
©2026 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. All rights reserved. AMD, Ryzen, Radeon, and combinations
thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Other product names used in this publication
are for identification purposes only and may be trademarks of their respective companies.

References
Pierre Alliez, David Cohen-Steiner, Mariette Yvinec, and Mathieu Desbrun. 2005. Variational tetrahedral meshing. ACM
   Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 24, 3 (2005), 617–625.
Aytek Aman, Serkan Demirci, and Uğur Güdükbay. 2022. Compact tetrahedralization-based acceleration structures for ray
   tracing. J. Vis. 25, 5 (2022), 1103–1115.
Carsten Benthin and Christoph Peters. 2023. Real-Time Ray Tracing of Micro-Poly Geometry with Hierarchical Level of
   Detail. Proceedings of High Performance Graphics 42, 8 (2023).
Brian Karis. 2022. Journey to Nanite. https://www.highperformancegraphics.org/slides22/Journey_to_Nanite.pdf
Vid Domiter and Borut Žalik. 2008. A sweep-line algorithm for triangulation of figures. Computers & Geosciences 34, 11
   (2008), 1551–1561.
Hans Freudenthal. 1942. Simplizialzerlegungen von Beschränkter Flachheit. Annals of Mathematics 43, 3 (1942), 580–582.
Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Andrew Kensler, Joshua Barczak, and David McAllister. 2024. Ray Tracing Animated
   Displaced Micro-Meshes. Comput. Graph. Forum 43, 7 (2024).


Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
Ray Tracing Massive Amounts of Animated Geometry                                                                      49:17


Warren Hunt, William Mark, and Don Fussell. 2007. Fast and Lazy Build of Acceleration Structures from Scene Hierarchies.
   In Proceedings of Symposium on Interactive Ray Tracing. 47–54.
Alec Jacobson, Ilya Baran, Jovan Popović, and Olga Sorkine. 2011. Bounded biharmonic weights for real-time deformation.
   ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 30, 4 (2011), 1–8.
Pushkar Joshi, Mark Meyer, Tony DeRose, Brian Green, and Tom Sanocki. 2007. Harmonic coordinates for character
   articulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 26, 3 (2007), 71–es.
Marek Kácerik and Jiří Bittner. 2025. UBVH: Unified Bounding Volume and Scene Geometry Representation for Ray Tracing.
   Proceedings of High Performance Graphics 44, 8 (2025).
Tero Karras and Timo Aila. 2013. Fast Parallel Construction of High-Quality Bounding Volume Hierarchies. In Proceedings
   of High-Performance Graphics. 89–100.
Andrew Kensler. 2008. Tree Rotations for Improving Bounding Volume Hierarchies. In Proceedings of Symposium on
   Interactive Ray Tracing. 73–76.
Khronos Group. 2020. Vulkan Ray Tracing Extensions Specification. https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-
   extensions/man/html/VK_KHR_ray_tracing.html
Khronos Group. 2024. Vulkan Extension: VK_NV_partitioned_acceleration_structure. The Khronos Group Inc. https:
   //docs.vulkan.org/features/latest/features/proposals/VK_NV_partitioned_acceleration_structure.html
Ares Lagae and Philip Dutré. 2008. Accelerating Ray Tracing using Constrained Tetrahedralizations. Computer Graphics
   Forum 27 (2008).
Won-Jong Lee and Gabor Liktor. 2020. Lazy Build of Acceleration Structures with Traversal Shaders. In Proceedings of ACM
   SIGGRAPH Asia (Technical Communication).
Pacôme Luton and Thibault Tricard. 2025. Real-time rendering of animated meshless representations. In HPG 2025 -
   Conference on High Performance Graphics. Eurographics.
Andrea Maggiordomo, Henry Moreton, and Marco Tarini. 2023. Micro-mesh construction. ACM Transactions on Graphics
   (TOG) 42, 4 (2023).
Daniel Meister, Shinji Ogaki, Carsten Benthin, Michael J Doyle, Michael Guthe, and Jiří Bittner. 2021. A survey on bounding
   volume hierarchies for ray tracing. Computer Graphics Forum 40, 2 (2021), 683–712.
Johannes Mezger, Stefan Kimmerle, and Olaf Etzmuß. 2003. Hierarchical techniques in collision detection for cloth animation.
   In Journal of WSCG, Vol. 11. 322–329.
Microsoft. 2020. DirectX Raytracing (DXR) Spec. https://microsoft.github.io/DirectX-Specs/d3d/Raytracing.html
Microsoft. 2026. DirectX Raytracing (DXR) Spec, Part 2. https://microsoft.github.io/DirectX-Specs/d3d/Raytracing2.html
Nate Morrical, Ingo Wald, and Valerio Pascucci. 2023. RTX-Accelerated Volumetric Rendering using Tetrahedral Meshes. In
   Proceedings of High Performance Graphics 2023. ACM.
Matthias Müller, Bruno Heidelberger, Matthias Teschner, and Markus Gross. 2005. Real time physics: class notes. ACM
   SIGGRAPH 2005 Courses (2005), 1–90.
Matthias Nießner. 2013. Rendering Subdivision Surfaces using Hardware Tessellation. Ph. D. Dissertation. University of
   Erlangen-Nuremberg. In collaboration with Stanford University.
NVIDIA Corporation. 2024. NVIDIA RTX Mega Geometry. NVIDIA Developer. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/nvidia-
   rtx-mega-geometry-now-available-with-new-vulkan-samples/
Hang Si. 2006. A Quality Tetrahedral Mesh Generator and Three-Dimensional Delaunay Triangulator Version 1.4 User’s Manual.
   https://wias-berlin.de/software/tetgen/files/tetgen-manual.pdf
Bowen Wang, Yingjie Sun, Nengxiong Xu, and Gang Mei. 2020. A Clustering-Based Bubble Method for Generating
   High-Quality Tetrahedral Meshes of Geological Models. Applied Sciences 10 (2020).
Jun Wang and Zeyun Yu. 2012. Feature-sensitive tetrahedral mesh generation with guaranteed quality. Computer-Aided
   Design 44 (2012).
Kaixin Yu, Yifu Wang, Peng Song, Xiangqiao Meng, Ying He, and Jianjun Chen. 2024. Weighted Squared Volume Minimization
   (WSVM) for Generating Uniform Tetrahedral Meshes. arXiv (2024).




                         Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
49:18                                                 Holger Gruen, Carsten Benthin, Michael Kern, and David McAllister


A       4D Barycentric Space to 3D World-Space BVH Upholds Bounding Property
We must show that if a point P expressed by a set of barycentric coordinates is inside the tetrahedron,
then P will always be contained within the 3D AABB generated from the 4D barycentric bounds,
regardless of how the tetrahedron vertices V𝑖 change.
  Any point P in 3D space within a tetrahedron can be expressed as:
                                                              4
                                                              Õ
                                                       P=            𝜆𝑖 V𝑖
                                                               𝑖=1
where 𝜆𝑖 = 1 and 𝜆𝑖 ≥ 0. In our 4D BVH, a node (representing a collection of triangles) defines a
          Í
4D hyper-tetrahedron 𝐵 4𝐷 such that for every point P in that subtree, its coordinates satisfy:

                           𝜆𝑖,min ≤ 𝜆𝑖 ≤ 𝜆𝑖,max for 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}
When the tetrahedron deforms, the vertices V𝑖 change to V𝑖0 . The new position of the point is:
                                                               4
                                                               Õ
                                                      P0 =           𝜆𝑖 V𝑖0
                                                               𝑖=1
Our goal is to prove that P0 is contained in the projected 3D box 𝐵 3𝐷
                                                                    0 = [x0 , x0 ]. The algorithm
                                                                          min max
calculates the 𝑥-axis bounds (and similarly for 𝑦, 𝑧) as:
                        4
                        Õ                                                       4
                                                                                Õ
                0                         0            0               0                          0            0
              𝑥 min =         min(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 )          𝑥 max =          max(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 )
                        𝑖=1                                                     𝑖=1
  Let 𝐿𝑖 be the interval [𝜆𝑖,min, 𝜆𝑖,max ]. Since 𝜆𝑖 ∈ 𝐿𝑖 , we are looking at the properties of the linear
combination of intervals. For a single term 𝑇𝑖 = 𝜆𝑖 𝑉𝑖,𝑥  0 , the range of possible values is:


                                                   0
                                range(𝑇𝑖 ) = {𝜆𝑖 𝑉𝑖,𝑥  | 𝜆𝑖 ∈ [𝜆𝑖,min, 𝜆𝑖,max ]}
Because this is a linear function of 𝜆𝑖 , the minimum and maximum of 𝑇𝑖 must occur at the boundaries
of the interval 𝐿𝑖 . If 𝑉𝑖,𝑥
                          0 ≥ 0, the minimum is 𝜆
                                                      𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 and the maximum is 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 . If 𝑉𝑖,𝑥 < 0,
                                                             0                             0         0

the minimum is 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 and the maximum is 𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 . In both cases, the contribution of the 𝑖-th
                            0                                 0

vertex to the total 𝑥-coordinate is bounded by:
                              0            0           0                0            0
                  min(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 ) ≤ 𝜆𝑖 𝑉𝑖,𝑥 ≤ max(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 )
By the Subdistributivity Property of interval arithmetic, the sum of these individual bounds is a
guaranteed enclosure for the sum of the terms:
                4
                Õ                                       4
                                                        Õ                     4
                                                                              Õ
                                  0            0                    0                           0            0
                      min(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 )≤           𝜆𝑖 𝑉𝑖,𝑥 ≤            max(𝜆𝑖,min𝑉𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜆𝑖,max𝑉𝑖,𝑥 )
                𝑖=1                                      𝑖=1                  𝑖=1
Substituting the definitions of 𝑥 min
                                  0 , 𝑃 0 , and 𝑥 0 :
                                       𝑥         max

                                              0
                                            𝑥 min ≤ 𝑃𝑥0 ≤ 𝑥 max
                                                            0

The same logic is applied to the 𝑦 and 𝑧 axes, hence every point P0 whose barycentric coordinates are
within the 4D bounds is guaranteed to be inside the projected 3D AABB. Even if the tetrahedron is
inverted, scaled to zero, or mirrored, the min/max logic handles the sign changes of 𝑉𝑖0 automatically.




Proc. ACM Comput. Graph. Interact. Tech., Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 49. Publication date: July 2026.
